docs: add authorization and user management user guide (#5282)
camunda/camunda-docs: docs/components/identity/authorization.md

---
id: authorization
title: Authorization
description: "Learn how to manage authorizations in your Orchestration cluster."
---

Identity provides unified, cluster-level identity management and authorizations. Authorizations are managed through permissions that can be assigned to [users](user.md), group, role and mapping.

## Authorization overview

Authorization is a mechanism that controls access to resources and actions based on permissions assigned to an entity.

Camunda 8 cluster uses resource-based authorization control, which means that permissions are granted to entities (like users) to perform specific actions on specified resources. For example, permissions can be set for actions such as reading, updating, creating, or deleting resources like process instances.

> Authorizations can be enabled or disabled for each Camunda 8 cluster via [configuration settings](/self-managed/identity/orchestration-identity/installation.md#enable-api-authentication-and-authorizations). By default, authorizations are disabled. When they are enabled, a user is not granted access to anything by default and must be explicitly granted permission to access applications or perform actions on resources.

Reviewer: In other places we've taken the approach that the page is written from the view of C8Run, and if we need to clarify a difference with helm its added in a `:::note` section. I'm fine with either but @conceptualshark may have a preference here

> Authorizations can be enabled or disabled for each Camunda 8 cluster via [configuration settings](/self-managed/identity/orchestration-identity/installation.md#enable-api-authentication-and-authorizations). By default, authorizations are disabled. When they are enabled, a user is not granted access to anything by default and must be explicitly granted permission to access applications or perform actions on resources.

Reviewer: Ah thats a good point, lets go with the general approach

> ## Authorization concepts

Reviewer: ❓ Are we describing this in a general sense or a C8 sense? I think here I would opt (its its about C8) to be more descriptive with an example, in C8 an authorization has 3 core parts, the first is an owner, the second are resources and the third is the permissions allowed on those resources. This is how I create the authorization in the UI.

In the future I think we can be quite visual here and create a graphic of an owner (person) a BPMN (resource id) and permission. As a text example:

Owner: {Type: User, ID: foo@Bar} has permissions: ["Read process definition", "Update process definition"] for resources: ["my-bpmn-process", "my-other-bpmn"]

This can then be extended to show groups and how we handle inheritance

Author: I can add an owner section and explain what does it mean in C8

### Permissions

Permissions are the building blocks of authorizations. They define the actions that can be performed on resources. Permissions are granted to entities (like users) to perform specific actions on specified resources.

Permissions are defined by a combination of a resource type, resource ID, and action. For example, a permission might grant a user the ability to read a specific process instance.

### Resources

Resources are the objects on which actions can be performed. Resources can be entities like process instances, tasks, or users. Resources are identified by a resource ID and type.

## Create an authorization

> 1. Log in to the Camunda 8 web application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Log in to Identity in your cluster.
```

2. Click on the `Authorizations` tab.
3. Select the resource type on the left side of the screen.
4. Click on the `Create authorization` button, this will create an authorization for the previously selected resource type.
5. Select the owner type (user, group, role, or mapping) to which you want to assign permissions.

> 6. Add the owner ID to which you want to assign permissions.

Reviewer: ❓ In a later iteration I think it would be good to explain what/where the owner ID comes from, as an example in the users its the username, in groups its the group ID etc

Author: I think it make sense to add this section once we have documented all the entities

7. Add the resource ID.
8. Select the permissions you want to permit.
9. Click on the `Create authorization` button.
10. The authorization is created and the user, group, role, or mapping is granted the permission to perform the action on the specified resource.

![identity-create-authorization-tab](./img/create-authorization-tab.png)

## Delete an authorization

> 1. Log in to the Camunda 8 web application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Log in to Identity in your cluster.
```

description: "Learn how to manage authorizations in your Orchestration cluster."
---

Authorizations are managed through permissions that can be assigned to [users](user.md), group, role and mapping.

## Authorization overview

Camunda 8 cluster uses resource-based authorization control, which means that permissions are granted to entities (like users) to perform specific actions on specified resources. For example, permissions can be set for actions such as reading, updating, creating, or deleting resources like process instances.

> A user is not granted access to anything by default and must be explicitly granted permission to access applications or perform actions on resources. Authorizations can be enabled or disabled in Self-Managed deployments via [configuration settings](/self-managed/identity/orchestration-identity/installation.md#enable-api-authentication-and-authorizations).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A user is not granted authorizations by default and must be explicitly granted permission to access applications or perform actions on resources. Authorizations can be enabled or disabled in Self-Managed deployments via [configuration settings](/self-managed/identity/orchestration-identity/installation.md#enable-api-authentication-and-authorizations).
```
